docs/intro.rst, before:

.. _intro:

Introduction
==============================

This package contains software for time-domain data processing.


Installation
===============

This package is currently only python with no compiled code.  It can be
installed / used with typical setuptools commands.

External Dependencies
------------------------

This code depends on a standard Python3 software stack with the usual packages
(numpy, scipy, matplotlib, etc).  There are also several additional python
package dependencies (toml, quaternionarray) that can be pip-installed.  There
are multiple ways of installing a working python3 stack on both Linux and OS X.
The solution you choose likely depends on what other things you are using
Python for- not just Simons Observatory work.  In these examples, we'll be
creating a python stack in ${HOME}/software/so, however if you already have a
python stack for use with S.O. tools, just skip this section.

Use Anaconda...
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After installing
the main Anaconda distribution, the "conda" command should be available.
Create a new conda environment::

  %> conda create --copy -m -p ${HOME}/software/so
  %> conda activate ~/software/so
  %> conda install pip numpy scipy matplotlib

... Or Use Virtualenv and Pip
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Install Python3 and the virtualenv package with your OS package manager (Linux)
or using macports / homebrew (OS X).  Next create a virtualenv and activate
it::

  %> virtualenv -p python3 ${HOME}/software/so
  %> source ${HOME}/software/so/bin/activate

pip installable external dependencies will be automatically installed when pip
installing the sotodlib package.


S.O. Affiliated Dependencies
---------------------------------

Activate / load your python stack from the previous section.  Since you created
a conda environment or virtualenv directory specifically for S.O. tools, you
can always delete that directory and make a new one as needed.

sotodlib requires the following affiliated packages:

- `so3g`_
- `spt3g_software`_

.. _so3g: https://github.com/simonsobs/so3g
.. _spt3g_software: https://github.com/CMB-S4/spt3g_software


Installing sotodlib
-----------------------------

You can either install directly to your conda environment / virtualenv::

    %> pip install sotodlib

Or (if you are frequently hacking on this code) you can install the package in
"develop" mode, which installs symlinks from your conda environment /
virtualenv that point back to your source checkout::

    %> cd sotodlib
    %> pip install -e .

Optional Dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are several optional dependencies that you may want to install depending
on which features of sotodlib you would like to use. These provided via
dependency groups and can be installed using the syntax::

    %> pip install .[group1,group2]

Current groups are:

- ``site_pipeline`` - Modules required within ``sotodlib.site_pipeline``

Running Tests
------------------

After installing, the unit tests can be run with::

    %> python setup.py test

Beware that these will take several minutes.


Something Went Wrong!
---------------------------

If something gets messed up, it's ok.  You are using a separate conda / virtualenv environment so you can just do::

    %> rm -rf ${HOME}/software/so

and start over from the beginning.  If you encounter an installation problem, please open a github ticket and provide the following details:

- OS and version.

- Where you got your python (Anaconda, OS packages, homebrew, etc).

- Python version (:code:`python --version`).

Commit message:

Creating requirements.txt (#1342)
* fix: releases accept patch minors

* fix:CI badge

* fix:CI badge

* updating docs

* fix: moving sodetlib to requirements.txt

* addressing Brian's comment

* revert: requirements from tests

docs/intro.rst, after:

.. _intro:

Introduction
==============================

This package contains software for time-domain data processing.


Installation
===============

This package is currently only python with no compiled code.  It can be
installed / used with typical setuptools commands.

External Dependencies
------------------------

This code depends on a standard Python3 software stack with the usual packages
(numpy, scipy, matplotlib, etc).  There are also several additional python
package dependencies (toml, quaternionarray) that can be pip-installed.  There
are multiple ways of installing a working python3 stack on both Linux and OS X.
The solution you choose likely depends on what other things you are using
Python for- not just Simons Observatory work.  In these examples, we'll be
creating a python stack in ${HOME}/software/so, however if you already have a
python stack for use with S.O. tools, just skip this section.

Use Anaconda...
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After installing
the main Anaconda distribution, the "conda" command should be available.
Create a new conda environment::

  %> conda create --copy -m -p ${HOME}/software/so
  %> conda activate ~/software/so
  %> conda install pip numpy scipy matplotlib

... Or Use Virtualenv and Pip
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Install Python3 and the virtualenv package with your OS package manager (Linux)
or using macports / homebrew (OS X).  Next create a virtualenv and activate
it::

  %> virtualenv -p python3 ${HOME}/software/so
  %> source ${HOME}/software/so/bin/activate

pip installable external dependencies will be automatically installed when pip
installing the sotodlib package.


S.O. Affiliated Dependencies
---------------------------------

Activate / load your python stack from the previous section.  Since you created
a conda environment or virtualenv directory specifically for S.O. tools, you
can always delete that directory and make a new one as needed.

sotodlib requires the following affiliated packages:

- `so3g`_
- `spt3g_software`_

.. _so3g: https://github.com/simonsobs/so3g
.. _spt3g_software: https://github.com/CMB-S4/spt3g_software


Installing sotodlib
-----------------------------

You can either install directly to your conda environment / virtualenv::

    %> pip install sotodlib

Or (if you are frequently hacking on this code) you can install the package in
"develop" mode, which installs symlinks from your conda environment /
virtualenv that point back to your source checkout::

    %> cd sotodlib
    %> pip install -e .

Optional Dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are several optional dependencies that you may want to install depending
on which features of sotodlib you would like to use. These provided via
dependency groups and can be installed using the syntax from your source checkout::

    %> pip install -r requirements.txt
    %> pip install .[group1,group2]

Current groups are:

- ``site_pipeline`` - Modules required within ``sotodlib.site_pipeline``. Please install the required dependencies using the command from your source checkout::

    %> pip install -r requirements.txt
    %> pip install .[site_pipeline]


Running Tests
------------------

After installing, the unit tests can be run with::

    %> python setup.py test

Beware that these will take several minutes.


Something Went Wrong!
---------------------------

If something gets messed up, it's ok.  You are using a separate conda / virtualenv environment so you can just do::

    %> rm -rf ${HOME}/software/so

and start over from the beginning.  If you encounter an installation problem, please open a github ticket and provide the following details:

- OS and version.

- Where you got your python (Anaconda, OS packages, homebrew, etc).

- Python version (:code:`python --version`).
